<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
            "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="content-type"
	content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=UTF-8" />
<title>Title Page</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" />
</head>
<body>

	<h1 title="Preface" id="prefacePage">Preface</h1>


	<p>Do not expect the two translations to match up exactly. First,
		each translation was done independently from differing sources.
		Second, some concepts are expressed very differently in Cherokee when
		compared to English. That being said, there is enough similarity
		between the two texts to assist the dedicated student in gaining much
		knowledge about the Cherokee language.</p>

	<p>
		The Cherokee language text was retyped based on a scanned image available from the <a
			href='http://www.archive.org/'>http://www.archive.org/</a>
		website.
	</p>

	<h2>The Cherokee Text</h2>

	<p>In 1824 the first portion of the Bible was translated into the
		Cherokee language: John 3, translated by a native Cherokee, At-see
		(also known as John Arch). It was circulated in manuscript, and
		received with wonderful avidity, being copied hundreds of times. He
		completed the Gospel of John by 1824. The complete New Testament was
		translated in September 1825 by David Brown, also a native Cherokee;
		this was also circulated in manuscript form, as a type for the
		Cherokee syllabary had not yet been created. Both Archer and Brown
		translated the full New Testament into Cherokee.</p>

	<p>The first actual printing of a Bible portion in Cherokee
		appeared in the Missionary Herald of December, 1827, and consisted of
		the first verse of Genesis, translated by Samuel Worcester. In 1828,
		David Brown, together with a man named George Lowrey, translated
		Matthew. This was printed in the Cherokee Phoenix from April 3, 1828
		till July 29, 1829. It is uncertain whether this translation was ever
		published in book form or not.</p>

	<p>Samuel Worcester, and Elias Boudinot, editor of the Cherokee
		Phoenix, published a revised translation of Matthew in 1829. This was
		published by the Cherokee National Press, New Echota. In the second
		edition, published in 1832, there is a statement that this translation
		had been "compared with the translation of George Lowrey and David
		Brown." A third edition was printed by the Park Hill Mission Press in
		1840.</p>

	<p>Worcester and Boudinot continued with translation, publishing
		Acts in 1833 and John in 1838. Worcester, together with Stephen
		Foreman, published John 1–3 in 1840, 1 and 2 Timothy in 1844, James in
		1847, 1 and 2 Peter in 1848, Luke in 1850, Exodus in 1853, Genesis in
		1856, Mark in 1857, and Romans through Ephesians in 1858. With the
		assistance of Charles C. Torrey, they published Philippians through 2
		Thessalonians, Titus through Hebrews and Jude through Revelation in
		1859. Besides the first three books translated together with Boudinot,
		Matthew (1829), Acts (1833), and John (1838), which were published in
		New Echota, Georgia, all the rest of Worcester's texts were published
		by the Park Hill Mission Press. In the meantime, Evan and John B.
		Jones had published Mark 1 and 2 Thessalonians, Titus, Jude, and
		Philemon in 1847, and Galatians through Colossians, 1 and 2 Peter in
		1848 and Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Hebrews and Revelation in 1849.
		Their work was published by the Cherokee Baptist Mission. The full New
		Testament was published by the American Bible Society in 1860.</p>

	<p>With the help of Stephen Foreman, Worcester also translated
		portions of Psalms, Proverbs, and Isaiah.</p>

	<p>Jonah, translated by Amory N. Chamberlain, was published in
		Tahlequah in 1888. Joshua was at an advanced stage of translation, and
		was perhaps even completed but was never published.</p>

	<p>A "corrected version" of old Testament portions, prepared by
		M.A. Pearson, was published in 1953 by the American Bible Society.</p>

	<p>Revisions of John (1948) and the New Testament (1951) were
		published in Westville, Oklahoma.</p>

	<p>In 1965 the Perkins School of Theology published a translation
		of Haggai by Jack and Anna Kilpatrick.</p>

	<div style='float: right;'>
		<a
			href='http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bible_translations_into_Cherokee'>http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bible_translations_into_Cherokee</a>
	</div>

	<h2>Young's Literal Translation</h2>

	<p>Young's Literal Translation is a translation of the Bible into
		English, published in 1862. The translation was made by Robert Young,
		compiler of Young's Analytical Concordance to the Bible and Concise
		Critical Comments on the New Testament. Young used the Textus Receptus
		(TR) and Majority Text (MT) as the basis for his translation. Young
		produced a “Revised Version” of the translation in 1887, which was
		based on the Westcott–Hort text that was completed in 1885. After
		Robert Young died on October 14, 1888, the publisher released a new
		Revised Edition in 1898.</p>

	<p>The Literal Translation is unusual in that, as the name implies,
		it is a strictly literal translation of the original Hebrew and Greek
		texts. The Preface to the Second Edition states,</p>

	<p style='font-style: italic;'>If a translation gives a present
		tense when the original gives a past, or a past when it has a present;
		a perfect for a future, or a future for a perfect; an a for a the, or
		a the for an a; an imperative for a subjunctive, or a subjunctive for
		an imperative; a verb for a noun, or a noun for a verb, it is clear
		that verbal inspiration is as much overlooked as if it had no
		existence. THE WORD OF GOD IS MADE VOID BY THE TRADITIONS OF MEN.</p>

	<p>Therefore, Young used the present tense in many places in which
		other translations use the past tense, particularly in narratives.</p>

	<div style='float: right;'>
		<a href='http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young%27s_Literal_Translation'>http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young%27s_Literal_Translation</a>
	</div>

</body>
</html>